while our brains get swamped with
information about patterns and color
through Callie's eyes fast movement
trumps everything
as she stalks the flies her eyes send
signals to the brains visual cortex
which analyzes what's changed between
one picture and the next up to seventy
times every second faster than the human
brain
[Music]
and a far bigger proportion of the
neurons in Callie's brain are dedicated
purely to the detection of movement
she almost can't help but pants
cats wild ancestors relied on low-light
vision and the ability to detect
movement to stalk prey but these
evolutionary adaptations have a downside
cats can't focus on anything closer than
around 30 centimeters in front of them
but where their eyes fail them cats have
another perfectly adapted sense to go in
for the kill
the team has set up an experiment to
reveal just how our cat's secret weapon
works so the camera can do in full HD
resolution up to 2,700 frames per second
I was thought 20 30 times got it John
Bradshaw is hoping these ultra-high
speed cameras will capture this
extraordinary sensory organ in action it
really is very very quick I've seen
still photographs of it happening but
there's nothing like actually seeing the
whole motion so I think we got it there
but it's very very very quick John's
trying to observe the cat's whiskers as
they move forward into the Attack
Position let's just take the toy away
for a second and that's can we ever look
at what we've just taken okay
so here we go the cat realizes the
masses within his grass but he wants to
know exactly where it is in relation to
his mass its eyes give up because they
can't focus very close that's where the
whiskers take over
so we can see here is the whiskers
suddenly being swept forward and now the
claws are coming into action so we got
here look the whiskers are pointing
almost directly in front of the cat's
nose it fine he's catching them with his
claws as he sweeps around trying to
catch the mouse but the little muscles
at the base of each whisker are really
tugging hard to swing those forward
completely out of the normal position is
this really extraordinarily detailed
I've never expected to see all of this
it all seems to take place in about a
fifth of a second which just shows how
fast cats reflexes really are from the
point where they sweep the whiskers
forward where the muscles contract and
then relax back and the whiskers spring
back again the mouse doesn't have a
chance
[Music]
far thicker and longer than normal hairs
whiskers also sit three times deeper in
the skin where they attach to nerve
endings telling the cat how far each one
is being bent back and how quickly their
whiskers are the same width as their
body allowing cats to navigate the
narrowest spaces
[Music]
cats also have whiskers above their eyes
and on their ankles sending them a
constant stream of information as they
sense the world around them
this peashooter might be low-tech but
it's the perfect tool to recreate a high
speed target for our Dragonfly it fires
out seeds so quickly our eyes can't
possibly see them but is the dragonflies
vision quick enough to spot it we're
going to have a look back at our slow
motion clip will the dragonfly detect
the tiny p.a dragonflies completely
still and the head definitely turns
before we see the seed come into frame
and then the Dragonfly almost takes off
but it has enough time to assess that
it's not a fly and it changes its mind
and stays on its perch
that's incredible the head definitely
moves first
the dragonflies vision is so quick it
contract the flying object and work out
it's not prey all in less than five
hundredths of a second it's partly due
to the speed at which they process
information
dragonfly is experienced time in a
completely different way to us they have
a reaction time of 30 milliseconds far
faster than ours the whole process of
seeing a fly taking off and catching it
can happen in about the same time it
would simply take us to react in any way
[Music]
but there's something even more
astonishing about the dragonfly's vision
to demonstrate patrick has a Flickr book
if I flip this book fast enough the
images begin to animate and that's
because the pages are moving so fast we
hardly notice them turning it's
essentially an optical illusion although
our vision appears to be seamless
our eyes actually work by capturing up
to 60 images a second our brain then
combines them to create the illusion of
a continuous moving image because the
pages are turning faster than that it
brings the animation to life so a
dragonfly however this would look
completely different the images would
appear slowed down and it would see each
individual page turning and that's
because dragonflies see faster than we
do whereas we see 60 images per second
they see around 200 and so they can
observe things that are just too fast
for even us to process in real time it's
impossible for us to see exactly what
this dragonfly is doing
but using our high-speed camera that
slows down the action 80 times we're
able to reveal the astonishing accuracy
of a dragonflies vision as it catches a
tiny midge in midair dragonflies have
been around for 300 million years since
before the dinosaurs in this time they
fine-tuned their eyes to see their world
in slow motion
[Music]
[Applause]
but now it's Kansas - no nothing at all
absolutely quiet is amazing
but one of the microphones picked up the
decibel waveform show the sound being
generated by the birds in flight each
spike is an individual wing beat
[Music]
but with the bar now there's almost
nothing even our array of super
sensitive microphones failed to pick up
any sound of Kenza in flight and he's
out doing exactly the same nothing
nothing at all I'll play again there's
not a sound here that is really
impressive isn't it it's it shows that
they really are silent fliers so how
does a bar now fly so silently when air
moves it generates sound
the more movement the greater the sound
[Music]
the pigeons large body and small wings
mean it can't stay airborne without a
lot of fast flapping this creates
turbulence and the feathers below
[Music]
the Peregrine has much larger wings
which it uses to build up speed but
chase down its prey
[Music]
the barn owl is far more graceful
Kansas large wings a small body make it
easier for her to generate lift so just
one gentle wing beat sees her gliding
effortlessly through the air creating
little more than a whisper in the
feathers below the rats are clever
animals they're easily trainable
consider this as a rat school for the
last three years we were working at
that's being used for the detection of
tuberculosis which is very promising
in fact because on a weekly basis we
pick out about ten patients which have
been missed in hospital TB he kills half
a million people a year in Africa one
and a half thousand every day the rats
could detect early signs of the virus in
human saliva
every time they identify a positive
sample the trainer's make a click sound
and a food reward of mashed banana
follows these rats are at an early stage
of training to get them used to the
click sound miss us to communicate with
the eye the moment when they hear this
sound music it has to stop what he s is
doing and counterfeit
[Music]
they then have to learn that sniffing in
a hole will lead to the click and reward
I start there are to know how to put to
the hole how to put it in ice on the
hole then it will be easy when I present
the example on that hole and that is the
way how there are further stages to
accustom the rats to the smell of the
virus and then to indicate when they
have smelt it once this is done the rats
know that a width of TB results in a
tasty treat the training that this rat
school is highly effective what would
take a human scientist all day to
diagnose takes the rats a mere seven
minutes they're also extremely accurate
we've got people now coming
automatically to us taking our rats
again your ads testers fought to the
Colossus because they had hardened in
the newspapers in several places all
right picking out some cases which are
missed by the conventional metals so
what makes a rat's sense of smell so
superior to a human's this is banner Rao
a cheese shop owner with a famous sense
of smell
I'm one of the best cheese now Zaisan in
UK I have judged three international
chief competition and our judge two
British cheese competitions I am a
cheese expert and this is Mandy the rat
one of the Tanzanian rat schools
champion sniffers Mandy's nose makes
about eight sniffs per second compared
to about two for Bono and the rest of us
Nessa Stilton Sabri it smells worse than
nappy it is a smelly and wash rind
cheese then this is a blue cheese carbon
blue posters whilst Bono is very good at
identifying types of cheese simply from
their smell Mandy sniffs in stereo she
can differentiate two very similar
smells with just one sniff about one in
every hundred of Mandy's jeans is given
over to odor detection poor ol Bono has
to make do with one in every thousand
from a droplet of urine left by another
rat Mandy can determine its gender
sexual maturity and reproductive status
now that's one test we won't be trying
on bono to help her in her quest she's
equipped with three superpowers first an
amazing approach to getting about Portia
is a jumping spider
able to leap up to 50 times around body
length
[Music]
nowhere seems beyond her reach
next her second superpower supervised
sight essential if she's to distinguish
her prey in all this cutter because her
prey doesn't stray Portia is a spider
eating spider this raises a few problems
her lunch is three times hasani's packed
with venom and surrounded by a sticky
trap mission impossible
not at all because of her third
superpower Porter is a genius
she can map her world in three
dimensions and formulate a plan of
attack
[Music]
you can have an idea
the web builder is blind it won't have a
clue that she's coming
[Music]
right on target and safely behind those
fangs but a mind as active as Portia's
can always do with more brain food here
there's no anchor point for the abseil
but Porsche has another idea instead of
going to the spider
[Music]
she will bring the spider to her she
plucks the strands to imitate struggling
prey drawing the spider in to its death
[Music]